DOC | EON - Add a chapter about staking to the official documentation (#73)
HorizenOfficial/evm-documentation: docs/05-staking/03-how_to_stake_on_eon.md

---
title: How to Stake on EON
---

> # How to Stake on EON

Reviewer: This whole section is missing information on:
1. generating keys in an alternate way using the bootstrapping tool
2. importing existing keys using the node config file if running the node natively, or the docker .env if using compose-evm-simplified
3. the behavior of secrets import from config file on first run only
4. how secrets generated in the local node are tied to the seed in the config file
5. configuring the node through the config to automatically start forging
6. listing existing forging stakes
7. withdrawing forging stakes

Reviewer: Can be addressed at a later time.

> A forger is required to run a node. See [How to Locally Build and Deploy and Develop and Deploy a Smart Contract](../04-develop_and_deploy_smart_contracts/04-local_build_and_deploy.md) for information on creating and running a node.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A forger is required to run a node. See [How to Locally Build and Deploy](../04-develop_and_deploy_smart_contracts/04-local_build_and_deploy.md) for information on creating and running a node.  
```

> The steps below require some basic general knowledge; a web application for staking is under construction and will be made available soon.

Author: That's not correct, the steps mentioned don't require basic knowledge of web application; they require basic knowledge on how to stake on eon, so we're providing a web application to help users stake easily

#### Create Forger Keys
On your local node, create new forger keys by making a `POST` request to `/wallet/createVrfSecret`.
The request will return your `publicKey` (later called `vrfPubKey`), while the privateKey will be stored in the node's wallet.

```
{
  "result" : {
    "proposition" : {
      "publicKey" : "4439cbfd50af1b846e5ef06889d3192ef7a459bdd4640dc6da506062de43113c80"
    }
  }
}
``` 

At this point there are two ways of staking on EON: via HTTP endpoint or via smart contract.
#### HTTP Endpoint
Make a `POST` request to `/transaction/makeForgerStake` with body
```
{
    "forgerStakeInfo": {
        "ownerAddress": "e8674062598b86d8258257a4d79e99d15594d864", 

>         "blockSignPublicKey": "e8674062598b86d8258257a4d79e99d15594d864", 

Reviewer: Shouldn't the blockSignPublicKey be an Edwards curve key pair, not a secp256k1 account key pair? (generated with `/wallet​/createPrivateKey25519` or `sctool generatekey`)

Reviewer: Sorry, I should have been more clear in my comment. It's not just the wrong format for blockSignPublicKey, but in the "Create Forger Keys" section a step to generate a blockSign key pair should also be added.

        "vrfPubKey": "4439cbfd50af1b846e5ef06889d3192ef7a459bdd4640dc6da506062de43113c80", 
        "value": 10000
    }
}
```
where:
- `ownerAddress`: is the address that is requesting to stake such amount and the only one allowed to unstake (withdraw) the specified amount;
- `blockSignPublicKey`: is the address that will sign the block when forged. It can be the same address as the ownerAddress or a different one (delegate forging); if this value is not specified the ownerAddress will be used;
- `vrfPubKey`: this is the key created in the previous step;
- `value`: the amount of ZEN expressed in Satoshis (10^8) to put on stake, that will represent your voting power.

> #### How to create a forging stake using web3js

Reviewer 3: change header to --> Create a Forging Stake using Web3js

> Below there is an example (written in javascript to run in Remix IDE) of how to create the forging stake by interacting with the contract:

Reviewer 3: change to --> Here is an example (written in javascript running in Remix IDE) on creating the forging stake with smart contract interaction:

> Here is an example (written in javascript to be run in Remix IDE) on creating the forging stake with smart contract interaction:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here is an example (written in JavaScript to be run in Remix IDE) of creating the forging stake with a smart contract interaction:
```

> Here is an example (written in JavaScript to be run in Remix IDE) of creating the forging stake with a smart contract interaction:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here is an example (written in JavaScript to be run in the Remix IDE) of creating the forging stake with a smart contract interaction:
```

        const contract = new web3.eth.Contract(abi, smartContractAddress, {from: accounts[0]});

        // Testing method:  delegate
        const ownerAddress = accounts[0];
        // pick one of the existing forgers, or create a new forger
        const blockSignPublicKey = "0x" + YOUR_BLOCK_SIGN; // the address that will sign the block when forged; it can be the same address as the ownerAddress or a different one (delegate forging); if this value is not specified the ownerAddress will be used
        const forgerVrfPublicKey = "0x" + YOUR_VRF_KEY; // this is the key created in the previous step
        const first32BytesForgerVrfPublicKey = forgerVrfPublicKey.substring(0, 66);
        const lastByteForgerVrfPublicKey = "0x" + forgerVrfPublicKey.substring(66, 68);

        methodName = 'delegate';
        console.log('Response for '+ methodName);

        const response = await contract.methods.delegate(blockSignPublicKey,first32BytesForgerVrfPublicKey,lastByteForgerVrfPublicKey,ownerAddress).send({value: amount *10**18}).then(console.log);

    } catch (e) {
        console.log("Error:" + e.message);
    }
  })()
```

> ⚠️ **Please, remember to replace YOUR_BLOCK_SIGN and YOUR_VRF_KEY with the actual keys, and make sure to specify the path of the native contract ABI (not provided in the documentation, but available here together with the complete Remix workspace)!**  

Reviewer 3: replace with:

**Note:** Remember to replace **YOUR_BLOCK_SIGN** and **YOUR_VRF_KEY** with the actual keys. Make sure to specify the path of the native contract ABI (not provided in the documentation, but available here together with the complete Remix workspace)!

> ⚠️ **Remember to replace YOUR_BLOCK_SIGN and YOUR_VRF_KEY with the actual keys. Make sure to specify the path of the native contract ABI (not provided in the documentation, but available here together with the complete Remix workspace)!**  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
⚠️ **Remember to replace YOUR_BLOCK_SIGN and YOUR_VRF_KEY with the actual keys, and to specify the path of the native contract ABI. The contract ABI is not provided here, but it is available with the complete Remix workspace.**  
```

> ⚠️ **Notice that this operation involves increasing the voting power of the forger defined by the blockSignPublicKey and forgerVrfKey, and with that the chance to produce blocks. The operation is a delegation of stake where no rewards will be automatically forwarded to you if you are not the owner of both blockSignPublicKey and forgerVrfKey. Ensure ownership before executing the transaction.

Reviewer: Please clarify this a bit, per my understanding the node that has access to the blockSign and forgerVrf keys and produces the block will always pay rewards to itself to the first wallet account key in the local node's wallet.

Author: Yes, maybe it's not perfectly clear then when it says `The operation is a delegation of stake where...` that it only refers when the blocksignPublicKey is the one of a third forger and not the current node (describing the delegation process). I'll rephrase the sentence

> ⚠️ **Please, notice that with this operation you are increasing the voting power of the forger defined by the blockSignPublicKey and forgerVrfKey, and with that the chance to produce blocks. The operation is a delegation of stake but no rewards will be automatically forwarded to you if you are not the owner of both blockSignPublicKey and forgerVrfKey. Double check them before executing the transaction.

Reviewer 3: replace with --> 

**Note:** Notice that with this operation involves increasing the voting power of the forger defined by the **blockSignPublicKey** and **forgerVrfKey**, and with that the chance to produce blocks. The operation is a delegation of stake where no rewards will be automatically forwarded to you if you are not the owner of both the **blockSignPublicKey** and **forgerVrfKey**.  Ensure ownership before executing the transaction.

> The transaction is reversible by executing a transaction signed by the ownerAddress.**

Reviewer 3: delete ** at the end of sentence

Author: I cannot delete ** at the end of the sentence because it's the end of bold format and not a typo: if you want the bold format to be removed we have to remove also the starting ** at line 78

> #### Enable forging

Reviewer 3: upper-case the letter "f" --> Forging

> At last make a `POST` request to `/block/startForging` to command the node to start forge blocks (if the node is not yet running you can set to true the `automaticForging` parameter in the `forger` section of the config file).  

Reviewer 3: delete "At last" and upper-case the letter "m" --> Make

> Make a `POST` request to `/block/startForging` to command the node to start forge blocks (if the node is not yet running you can set to true the `automaticForging` parameter in the `forger` section of the config file).  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Make a `POST` request to `/block/startForging` to command the node to start forging blocks. If the node is not yet running, set the `automaticForging` parameter to `true` in the `forger` section of the config file.  
```

> To stop forging you can call a similar endpoint `/block/stopForging`.

Reviewer 3: replace with:
To stop forging call the endpoint,

> To stop forging call the endpoint `/block/stopForging`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To stop forging, call the endpoint `/block/stopForging`.
```

> #### Stake maturity

Reviewer 3: upper-case the letter "m" --> Maturity

> When a forger stake is created is not immediately ready to let the forger take part into the forgers' election. It needs **2 consensus epochs** before the stake reaches the maturity period; after that, the forger will be ready to take part into the slot leader lottery and be able to forge new blocks. 

Reviewer 3: replace with:

When a forger stake is created, it is not immediately ready to let the forger take part into the forgers' election. The skate needs **two consensus epochs** before the stake reaches the maturity period. Afterwards, the forger will be ready to take part into the slot leader lottery and forge new blocks.

> When a forger stake is created, it is not immediately ready to let the forger take part into the forgers' election. The stake needs **2 consensus epochs** before reaching the maturity period. Afterwards, the forger will be ready to take part into the slot leader lottery and be able to forge new blocks. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a forger stake is created, it is not immediately ready to let the forger take part in the forgers' election. The stake needs **2 consensus epochs** before reaching the maturity period. Afterwards, the forger will be ready to take part in the slot leader lottery and be able to forge new blocks. 
```

> #### Verify the stake is created

Reviewer 3: replace header with:

Verify the Stake Creation

> To make sure the operation was successful, you can make a `POST` request to `/transaction/allForgingStakes` and verify the publicKey used to create the forger stake appears in the returned list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To make sure the operation was successful, make a `POST` request to `/transaction/allForgingStakes` and verify the publicKey used to create the forger stake appears in the returned list.
```

> To make sure the operations above were successful, you can make a `POST` request to `/transaction/allForgingStakes` and verify the publicKey used to create the forger stake appears in the returned list.

Reviewer 3: To make sure the operations was successful, make a `POST` request to `/transaction/allForgingStakes` and verify that the **publicKey** used to create the forger stake appears in the returned list.
